[MUSIC]
>> Brian Holt: Let's take a look
at a double rotation now.
Okay, so we have 5,
8 and we're gonna add 7.
So now we have kind of this bent look,
right?.
We're gonna have to perform
a right rotation, right,
because this 8 has to come over.
But unfortunately, if you perform
a normal rotation, you end up with this.
If you do a single rotation just right off
the bat, that actually doesn't really buy
you anything cuz it's still
out of balance, right?
So, you have to perform what's
called a double rotation.
The nice thing about a double rotation is
what you do is you do a left rotation on
one of the children and then you do
a right rotation on the root node, right?
So you just do a left rotation
on one of the lower kids and
then you just do a right rotation
on the parent and that's it.
Okay, so the way you tell you
need to do this double rotation.
Is that I need to do a right rotation
that but it's left heavy, right?
So when I say left heavy,
I mean the left is greater than the right.
It doesn't mean it's out of balance,
right, because in this case,
8 is not out of balance.
It's just left heavy, right, but
I'm gonna perform a right rotation.
In other words,
if you see this bent look to it,
that means you need to
do a double rotation.
Whereas if it's a straight one like this,
then it only needs to
be a single rotation.
So again, if you do a right rotation but
it's left heavy,
you need a double rotation and vice-versa.
If you need to do a left rotation and
it's right and the child is right heavy,
then you have to do a double rotation.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
so again, this is what it looks
like in terms of that logic.
So nodes C, when you add it, right,
this it right after you add it.
This is children are zero zero,
so it's imbalance.
It's children is zero and one, right?
So it's imbalance being node B.
And then node A we get,
it's right child is out of balance, right?
Or it's out of balance because it's
right child has height two and
it's left child has zero.
But unfortunately, node B is left heavy,
but we need to do a right rotation.
So that's when we know it
need to do a double rotation.
So what we're gonna do is were gonna
call a left rotation on node B.
And all is gonna do is it's gonna
basically make this 5,7,8, so
you can perform left rotation and
it's just gonna make it look like this.
So you're gonna make it
basically a straight line.
And then after that we can easily
do just a normal rotation and
everything works out just great.
And you'll end up with 7, 5, 8, right?
And that's eventually
what you're gonna end up
with.
>> Brian Holt: So
that's the idea of what's happening
with the double rotation.
So this is not what we want, right, this
is what it looks like when it's broken.
Okay, so we have 5, 8, 7.
So we added 7, that's fine.
We find out that we need to
perform a double rotation, right?
Because we figured out that it needs
the right rotation and it's left and
it's the right child is left heavy.
Again, heavy meaning that the left
side is greater than the right side.
If there was another child here like 5,
7, 8, 9, right?
And there is something off here.
Then that be fine, right?
Because it wouldn't be heavy on one side.
Except you would never have that happen.
Never mind, disregard that.
Okay, so
>> Brian Holt: We've discovered that when
you do a right rotation, it needs to be
double rotation because 8 is left heavy,
check.
>> Brian Holt: So
first thing we're gonna
do is we're gonna perform
a left rotation on the left heavy
right child [LAUGH], which means 8.
We're gonna perform a left
rotation on this one.
Don't worry, I hear myself.
I hear the things that I say
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Brian Holt: And I know it's
complicated.
I'm so
grateful I already learned this [LAUGH].
Okay, so after performing that it's
like literally the same logic,
you don't have to have any
sort of special functionality.
You just need to say do I need
to perform a left rotation or
right rotation on the offending child,
right?
And then that's it.
So while this is conceptually difficult
,the code for it is literally
an if statement, do I need to do an extra
rotation, yes, do the extra rotation.
And that's it.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so I performed
that left rotation on 8 and I end up with
this, right, which is what we expect.
Now, it's a right rotation with
the right heavy child, which is A plus.
We can do that, no problem and
you end up with this.
>> Brian Holt: So again,
the real problem code here to write
is the left and right rotation.
It's the actual, this part right here.
This is far and
above the stuff that it's hard to do and
really just hard to conceptualize and
difficult to get out and cut.
But once you have the left and
right rotation functions using, it's
just application of those two different
functions.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
so I swear to God, that's it.
[LAUGH] So it's just nailing
down those rotations is a pain.
So, to be totally honest, even though
we're not doing deletes today, but
even deletes follow this pattern.
The only issue with deletes
is as you go up the tree,
you have to keep asking every step of
the way, do I have to perform a rotation?
Because deletes can get things
way out of whack, right?
Whereas when you're doing ads,
it's only a single rotation or
a double rotation every time.
There's nothing you can do to an AVL
tree to make you have to do more than
that, within that.